The videos were really inspiring like you're the reason I'm like going into grad school
And there's this little bell in the back of my mind. It's like do I want that?
To get more people going into math PhDs math Academy of Finance and
Computer science almost certainly have an overallocation of talent
I actually I'm quite determined at some point to like be a high school math teacher for some number of years math lends itself to
Synthetic data how AlphaGo is trained you could have it
Produce a lot of proofs and just train on a whole bunch of those and the thing that takes at most 30 minutes of the teacher's time
maybe even 30 seconds has these
Completely monumental rippling effects for the life of the student they were talking to that then sets them on this whole different trajectory
Okay today, I have the pleasure of interviewing Grant Sanderson of the YouTube channel through blue one brown
You all know who grant is I'm really excited about this one by the time that an AI model can get gold in the
International Math Olympiad is that just a GI given the amount of creative problem solving and chain of thought required to do that I
To be honest have no idea what people mean when they use the word a GI
Yeah, I think if you ask ten different people like what they mean by it
You're gonna get ten slightly different answers and it seems like what people want to get it is a
Discrete change that I don't think actually exists. We've got okay AI is up to a certain point. They're not a GI
They might be really smart, but it's not a GI
And then after some point that's the benchmark when like now there now. It's generally intelligent
The reason that world model doesn't really fit is it feels a lot more continuous where
You know gpd4 feels general in the sense that you have one training algorithm
That applies to a very very large set of different kinds of tasks that someone might want to be able to do and that's cool
That's like an invention that people in the 60s might not have expected to be true for the nature of how artificial intelligence can be
Programmed so it's it's generally intelligent, but maybe what people mean by oh, it's not a GI is you've got certain benchmarks where
You know, it's better than most people at some things, but it's not better at most people than others
You know at this point, it's better than most people at math
You know it's better than most people at solving AMC problems and like Imo problems is just not better than the best
And so maybe at the point when it's getting golds in the Imo
That's a sign that okay. It's it's as good as the best and we've ticked off another domain
but
I don't know like it is what you mean by a GI that you've you've enumerated all the possible domains that something could be good at
And now it's better than humans at all of them or enough that it could take over
substantial fractions of
You know human jobs or something where right now it's it's it's impressive
But it's not gonna be even 1% of GDP, but in my mind if it's getting gold in Imo
I mean having seen some of those problems from your channel
I'm I'm thinking wow, that's that's really coming after our
Podcasters and video animators. I don't know
I don't know that feels orthogonal because getting a gold in the Imo feels a lot more like being really really good at
Go or chess like those those feel analogous. Well, it's it's super creative
Like I think anyone I don't I don't know chess as well as the people are into it
But everything that I hear from them the sort of moves that are made and choices have all of the air of creativity
I think as soon as they started generating artwork than everyone else could appreciate
Oh, there's there's something that deserves to be called creative here and the creative side of the math
You know, I'm I don't know how it would look when people get them to be getting golds at the Imo
but I imagine
It's something that looks a little bit like how alpha go is trained where you have it like play with itself a whole bunch
You know math lends itself to
Synthetic data in the ways that a lot of other domains don't you could have it
Produce a lot of proofs in a proof-checking language like lean for example and just train on a whole bunch of those and like is this
A valid proof is this not a valid proof and then counterbalance that with
English written versions of something and so I imagine what it looks like once you get something that is solving these Imo level things
One of one of two things either it writes a very good proof
That you feel like is unmotivated because anyone who reads math papers has this feeling that there are there two types
There's the ones where you morally understand why the result should be true and then there's the ones where you like I can follow the steps
Why would you have come up with that?
I don't know but I guess that shows that the result is true and you you're left wanting something a little bit more
And so you could imagine if it produces that on the gold to get a gold in the Imo
Is that the same kind of ability as what is required to replace jobs?
Just like not really like the the impediments between where it is now and replacing jobs feels like a whole different set of things like
Having a context window that is a longer than you know some small things such that you can make connections over long periods of time and build
Relationships and understand where someone's coming from and the actual problem-solving part of it
I mean, it's a sign that it would be a more helpful tool
But in the same way that like Mathematica can help you solve math problems much more effectively
Tell me why I should be less amazed by it or maybe put in a different context for the reason I would be very impressed is
That with chess or something obviously this is not all the chess programs are doing
but there's a level of research you can do to narrow down the possibilities and more importantly
The in the math example, it seems that with some of the examples you've elicited on your channel
For example, the ability to solve the problem is so dependent on coming up with the right
abstraction to think about it coming up with
Ways of thinking all the problems that are not evident in the problem itself or in any other problem in any other test that seems different from
Just a chess game where you don't have to like
Well, what is the largest structure of this chess game in the same way as you do with the IML problem?
I think you should ask people who know a lot about go and chess and I'd be curious to hear their opinions on it because I
Imagine what they would say is if you're gonna be as good at go as Alpha go is you're also not doing tree search
At least exclusively it's not dependent on something as both in that because you get this combinatorial
Explosion, which is why people thought that game would be so much harder for so much longer
There sort of has to be something like a higher level structure in their understanding and then don't get me wrong
I would be super impressed and like anticipate being very impressed when you get
AI's that can solve these IMO problems because you're absolutely right
There's a level of creativity involved. The only claim I'm making is that
Being able to do that feels distinct from the impediments between I don't know where we are now and the
AI's take over all of our jobs or something
It just it seems like it's gonna be another one of those boxes
That's it's this historic moment analogous to chess and go more so than it's good to be analogous to the industrial revolution
I'm surprised you wouldn't be more compelled
Compilled right or just you don't think that skill of
This problem is isomorphic to this completely different way of thinking about what's happening in the situation
And here's me going through the 50 steps to put all that together into this one proof
I'm surprised don't think that's upstream of a lot of valuable tasks
I think it's a similar level of how impressed I was with
the stable diffusion type stuff where you know you ask it give me a
Landscape of beautiful mountains, but made out of like quartz and gemstones or something and it gives you this thing which
Has all of the essence of a landscape, but it's not literally a landscape and so you realize okay
There's something something beyond the literal that's understood here
I'm like that's very impressive and in the same way to solve one of these math problems that requires creativity
You can't just go from the definitions. You're 100% right
you need this element of lateral thinking which is why we find so much joy in
Finding the solutions ourselves or even just seeing other people get those solutions
It's exactly the kind of joy that you get out of good artistic analogies and comparisons and mixing and matching
I'm very impressed by all of that. It's just I think it's in the same category and it's
Maybe I don't have the same opinions as a lot of other people with this hard line between there's pre-AGI and post-AGI
Like I just don't know what they mean by the word AGI
And I don't think that you're gonna have something that's this measurable discrete step much less that a math tournament is gonna be
An example of what that discrete step would look like interesting interesting
Okay applied mathematicians, okay, where do we put them in society where they can have the biggest benefit?
we like a lot of them go into computer science and IT and
I'm sure there's been lots of benefits there
But we're you know where are there are parts of society where you just have a whole bunch of mathematicians go in and they can make
Things a lot better, you know, I don't know transportation or logistics or manufacturing
But where else do you think they might be useful? That's such a good question in some ways?
I'm like the worst person to ask about that
This isn't gonna answer your question
But instead is gonna like fan the flames of why I feel it's an important question
I have actually been thinking recently about if it's worth making an out-of-typical video
That's specifically addressed it like and inspiring people to ask that especially students who are graduating because I think
This thing happens where when you fall in love with math or some sort of technical field by default in school
You you study that and when you're studying that
effectively
You're going through an apprenticeship to be an expert in that or a researcher in that
You know the structure of studying physics in a university or math in a university even though they know that not all majors are gonna go
Into the field
The people that you're gaining mentorship from are academics and our research is in the field
So it's hard not to effectively be apprenticing in that
And I also have noticed that when I go and give talks at universities or things like this and
Students come up after and they're like saying hi. There's a lot of them like grand
The videos were really inspiring like you're the reason that I studied math or that you're the reason
I'm like going into grad school and there's this little bell in the back of my mind. That's like cool cool
I'm amazed. I don't know if I believe I was wholly responsible for it, but like cool to have that impact
Do I want that?
Is this a good thing to get more people going into math PhDs on the one hand
I unequivocally want more people to self-identify as liking math. That's very good
But that those who are doing that necessarily get shuffled into the traditional outlets like math academia
Yeah, I think you highlighted very right. It's like math academia finance and
Computer science data science something in there in general
Are very common things to go to and as a result they almost certainly have an overallocation of talent
All three of those are valuable, right?
I'm not saying like those are not valuable things to go into
But if you were playing God and like shifting around where do you want people to go again?
I'm not answering your question
I'm just asking it in other words because I don't really know
I think you should probably talk to the people who made that shift of which there aren't a huge number
But like Eric Lander is maybe one good example
Jim Simons would maybe be another whereas people who were doing a very purely academic thing
And then decided to shift to something very different
now I have sort of had this thought that it's very beneficial to
Insert some forcing function that gets the pure mathematicians to spend some of their time in a non-pure math setting
you know
NSF grants coming with a a
Requirement that 10% of your time goes towards a collaboration with another department or something like that
The thought being these are really good problem solvers and a specific category of problems and to just distribute that talent elsewhere
Might be helpful and when I when I like run this by mathematicians. Sometimes there's a mixed response for the like
I don't know if we'd be all that useful like there's a sense that the
Aesthetic of what constitutes a good math problem is by its nature rooted in the purity of it such that it's maybe a little
Elitist to assume that just because people are really really good at solving that kind of problem that somehow their
Abilities are more generalizable than other people's abilities
You know why ask about the applied mathematicians rather than saying like shouldn't the applied biologists go and work in
Logistics and things like that because they also have a set of problem-solving abilities. That's maybe generalizable the back of my mind
I think no, but the mathematicians are
Really is something general about math
so I
Don't have the answers
I will say I'm actually very curious to hear from people for what they think the right answers are or from people who made that switch
Let's say they were a math major or or something adjacent like computer science physics
And then they decided that they wanted to pour themselves into something not because
That was the academic itch that scratched that they were scratching by being good at school and getting to appreciate that
But because they stepped back and said what impact do I want to make on the world?
I'm hungry for more of those stories because I think it could be very compelling to
convey those specifically to my audience who is probably
On track to go into just the traditional math type fields and maybe there's room to have a little bit of influence to disperse them more
Effectively, but I don't know. I don't know what more effectively looks like because at the end of the day
I'm like I'm a math youtuber, right? I'm not someone who
Has a career in logistics or manufacturing or all of these things in such a way that I can have an in-tune feel for where is there a
need for this specific kind of abstract problem-solving it might be useful to
speculate on how
An undergrad or somebody who's a young math whiz might even begin to contemplate
Here's where I can have an edge. I'm remembering actually it just occurred to me a former podcast guest Lars Dusset
he was a game designer actually and he
Started learning about Georgism, which is this idea that you should tax land and only land
And so he got really interested in not only writing about those ideas
But also with well if you're gonna tax land you had to figure out what the value of land is
I mean, how do you figure out the value of land?
There's all these algorithms of how you do this optimally based on neighboring land and how to average across land and
There's a lot of intricacies there
And so he he now has a start-up where he just contracts with cities to implement these
Algorithms to help them assess the value of their land which makes property taxes much more feasible
You know just that's another example right where the motivation was more philosophical
But his specialty as a technical person helped them
You know how to make a contribution there. I think that's perfect
Probably the true answer is that you're not gonna give a universal thing for any individual
It's gonna be based on where their life circumstances connect them into something either because they he had an interest in
Georgism for whatever reason, but if someone I don't know their
Their dad runs a paper mill and they're like connected to the family business in that way and realize they can like plug themselves in a little bit
More efficiently you you're gonna have this wide diversity of the ways that people are applying themselves
That does not take the form of general advice given from some podcast somewhere
But instead takes the form of simply inviting people to like think critically about the question rather than following the momentum of
What being good at school implies about your future?
We were talking about this before the interview started
but we have a much better grasp on reality based on our mathematical tools and I'm not talking about anything advanced literally just it will
being able to count and
In the decimal system that even the Romans didn't have
How likely do you think it is that something that significant would be enjoyed by descendants in hundreds or thousands of years?
Or do you think that that kind of basic numeracy level stuff?
Those kinds of thinking tools are basically all gone just so I understand the question right you're talking about how
Having a system for numbers
Changes the way that we think that then lends itself to a better understanding of the world like we can do commerce. Yeah, exactly
Or we can think in terms of orders of magnitude
Yeah, it would have been hard to think and we have the word orders of magnitude right in a way that is hard to write down much less
Think about if you're doing Roman numerals like is there something analogous to that?
descendants um, I
mean fluency with a
Programming interface really can help understanding certain problems
I think the when people mess around in a notebook with something and when it feels like a really good tool set
There's a way that that has the same sensation as adopting a nice notation in that you
Write something with a small number of symbols, but then you discover a lot about the implication of that in the case of notation
It's because the rules of algebra are very constrained
And so when you write something you can go through an almost game-like process to see how it reduces and expands and then see something
That might be non-trivial and in the case of programming
Of course the machine is doing the crunching and you might get a plot that reveals some extra data
I think we're maybe at a phase where there's room for that to become as a much more fluid process such that
Rather than having these small little bits of friction like you've got to set up the environment and you got to like it in the notebook
You've got to like find the right libraries that there's something that feels as fluid as when you are
Good at algebra and you're just at a whiteboard kind of noodling it out
I think there's something to be said for the fact that there's still so much more value in
If you and I were to like go into some math topic right now, right?
You ask me something that's a terrible question for a podcast, but I'm like, oh, let's actually dig into it
The right medium to do that is still paper
I think like I would break out some paper and we would scribble it out
And so whenever it becomes the case that the right medium to do that
Lends itself to simulation and to programming and all that
That feels like it would get to the point where it shifts the way that you even think about stuff. Yeah, that's really interesting
What's up with miracle years?
So this is something that happens has happened throughout science and especially with mathematicians
Where they have a single year in which they wake up many if not most of the important discoveries that they happen the career
You know Newton, Einstein, Gauss, they all had these years. Do you have some explanation of what's going on?
What's your take? I
Think there's a bunch of possible explanations
It can't just be youth because youth last ten years not one year
So it must have something to do with every 35 year old right now
You know, you know what I mean made 20 years. Yeah, so yeah, but it can't just be that
I don't know. There's a bunch of possible things you could say one is you're in a situation in life
Where you have nothing else going for you or you just like really free for that one year
And then you become successful after that year is over based on what you did. Yeah, but what is your take?
I don't know. I so I agree. That's probably multiple factors not one
one thing could be that
The miracle year is the like exhalation and there's been many many years of inhalation
Where often let's say, you know, the classic one is Einstein's where his make miracle year
we're also some of the first papers like kind of springing on to the scene and I
Would guess that a lot of the ideas
were not
bumping around his head only in that year
but it's like many many years of thinking about it and kind of coalescing and so you might be in a position where you can build up all
of this
potential energy and then
For whatever reason there's one time in life that lends itself to actually releasing all of that
If I try to reflect on like my own
History with what I'm doing now. I think I didn't appreciate early on how much potential energy
I was working from simply from being a student and in college where there's just a bunch of ways of thinking about things or empathy with new learners or
Just cool concepts, right?
The basic concept behind a video that in fact it was many many years of like all of my time having learned math
Before I started putting out stuff online that I was able to eat into and then maybe it was a little later where
Okay, the well never runs dry
There's always a long list of things that I want to cover but in some sense like I recognize that the well was
at risk of running dry in a way that I never thought that it could and without being a little deliberate about
Devoting some of my day not just to output and producing but to stepping back and like learning new things and touching something
I never would have that doesn't happen by default
I don't know if this is all but also the case for the people who have genuine miracle years where they were like letting out all of
This stuff and then it takes a decade to build up that same level of potential energy
The other thing
You have everything to gain and nothing to lose when you are young. So even if it's not merely youth
There's a willingness to be creative and there's also
None of the obligations that come from having found success before right
You know, there's there's certain academics who made an extremely deliberate effort not to let
What would they call it? Is it like the curse of success or there's some time for but I think maybe
James Watson, you know had this standard reply to invitations for you know talks and interviews and things like that
It was basically like no to everyone because I just want to be a scientist
it was much more articulate than that and he has all these nine points, but that was the gist of it and
Short of doing that
I think it's very easy for someone to have a lot of other things that eat into their mind share and time and all of that that
Even if it's just 20 hours a week like actually that that really interrupts a creative flow
Were you a student when you started the channel?
Technically, yeah, the very very first video was made when I was a senior at Stanford
Basically, I'd been like toying around with just a personal programming project in my last year of college that was the beginnings of what is now like
The animation tool I work with I didn't intend for it to be a thing that I would use as a math youtuber
I didn't even really know what a youtuber was. It was really just like a personal project
And it was March of that year
I think that I published the first ever video and so it was kind of right at that transition point
Do you think you could you would have done it if you had let's say become I don't know what you're planning on doing after college
I remember you saying somewhere maybe a data scientist, but data scientist and math PhD were the two like
50-50 contenders basically is there a role then which he started doing that but then later on
Made manum or do you think that that was only possible in a world where you had some time to kill in your senior year?
if the goal was to make math youtube videos, it would have been a
wild thing to do to do it by like making manum as the method for it because
It's so strikingly inefficient to do it that way at the very least
I probably would have built on top of an existing framework if I had
I mean there's so many things that I would tell my past self if I could go back in time even if the goal was to make that
It's like certain design decisions that caused pain that could have been fixed earlier on
But if the goal was to make videos, there's just so many good tools for making videos
I probably would have started with those or if I wanted to script things
Maybe I would have first learned after effects really effectively and then learn the scripting languages around after effects
That might have even been better for all I know
I really don't know but I just kind of walked into it because I
The initial project was to make something that could illustrate certain ideas and math especially when it came to
Visualizing functions as transformations mapping inputs to outputs as opposed to graphing
the the video output was just a way of knowing that I had
Completed that personal project in some sense and then it turned out to be fun because I also really enjoy teaching and really enjoy tutoring and stuff
I
Don't know then again. There's a lot of other people who make their own tools
for math gifts and
Little illustrations and things which on the one hand feels very inefficient like there's I don't know if people come across a math
Gift on Wikipedia. There's a very high probability it comes from this one individual who just strangely prolific at producing these like creative commons visuals and
He has his own like home baked thing for how he does it and then there's
someone who
Came across on Twitter Matt Matt Henderson who has these completely beautiful
Math gifts and such and again
It's a very home baked thing that is like built on top of
Shaders, but he kind of has his own stuff there
And maybe there's something to be said for the level of ownership that you feel once it is your own thing that just
unlocks a sense of creativity and
Feeling like hey, I can just describe whatever I want because if I can't already do it
I'll just change the tool to make it able to do that
For all I know that level of creative freedom is necessary to like take on a wide variety of topics, but
Your guess is as good as mine for those counterfactuals. Yeah, this is personally interesting to me
Because I also started the podcast in college and I just like was off track of anything
I was planning on doing otherwise and if this is you know, many many orders of magnitude away from through the one round
I don't want the audience to you know, cringe in unison, but I just think it's interesting like these kinds of projects
How often
Something that I don't know later on ends up being successful is something that was started almost on a whim as a hobby
You know when you're in college or something like that
I will say there's a benefit to starting it in a way that is low stakes like you're not banking on it growing
I I had no
Anticipation of much less an expectation of three blown round growing
I think the reason I kind of kept doing it was in the fork of life if I did the math PhD and all that
I thought it might be a good idea to have a little bit of a footprint on the internet for math exposition
I was thinking of it as like a very niche thing that you know
Maybe some math students and some people who are into math would like it
But I could sort of show the stuff as a portfolio not as a as an audience
You know size that was meaningful and I think I was surprised by what an appetite
There was for the kind of things that I was making and in some ways maybe that's helpful because I see a lot of people who
Jump in they they jump in with the goal of being a youtuber. I think it's the most common
Desired job among the youth is to be like a tiktoker or a youtuber which think of that
Well, but when you jump in with that as a goal
You kind of aim for too large an audience and end up making the content which is best for no one
Because one you're probably not that good at making videos yet
And so you're competing if it's a general a generally applicable idea
You're competing with like all of the other communicators out there
Whereas if you do something that's almost
Unreasonably niche and also you're not expecting it to blow up. It's like one you're not going to be disappointed
It's like outstanding when a thousand people view it as opposed to being disappointing and then two
You might be making something that is the best possible version of that content for the audience who watches it
because no one else is making that for them because it's too narrow a target and
That's sort of the beauty of the internet is that there is an incentive to do that
And I don't know if this is the case with your podcast when you're starting off where
Not thinking about oh, how can I make this as big as possible actually made it more in-depth for those who were listening to it
Is it surprising to you that prehistoric humans don't seem to have had
Just basic arithmetic and numeracy to me with with a sort of I guess to us with the modern
Understanding that kind of stuff seems so universally useful and so fundamental
That it's shocking that it just doesn't come about naturally in the course of interacting with the world
Do you think it's is that surprising that it's just a concept of numbers and you're right
It's so in our bones that it's hard to empathize with not having a numeracy a
Lot of it's linked to if you think okay
What's the first place that like people think about numbers most people like in their daily lives?
It's linked to commerce and money and such so maybe some ways the question is the same as saying is it surprising that like early
Humanity didn't have commerce or didn't deal with money
Maybe when you're below Dunbar's number in your communities
Like a tit for tat structure just makes a lot more sense and actually works well
And it would just be obnoxious to like actually account for everything
The other loosely related idea. Have you come across those?
studies where
When anthropologists will interview tribes of people that are removed enough from normal society that they don't have the level of numeracy that you're
I do but they you know, there's some notion of counting you
If you have one coconut or nine coconuts like you have a sense of that that if you ask what number is halfway between one and nine
Those groups will answer three
Whereas you or I or people in our world would probably answer five and because we think on this very linear scale
It's interesting that evidently the like natural way to think about things is logarithmically
Which it kind of makes sense like the social dynamics of as you go from solitude to a group of ten people to a group
Of 100 people have roughly equal steps in increasing complexity more so than if you go from like one to fifty one to a hundred and two and
I wonder if it's it's the case that by adding numeracy in some senses
We've also like lost some numeracy or lost some intuition in others where now if you ask, you know
Middle school teachers. What's a difficult topic to teacher for students to understand? They're like logarithms
But that should be deep in our bones, right?
So somehow it got unlearned in the needs to be maybe it's in the formal sense that it's harder to relearn it
but there's
there's maybe a sense of like numeracy and a sense of quantitative thinking that
Humans naturally do have that is hard to appreciate when it's not expressed in the same language or in the same ways
Yeah, I have seen the thing from Joseph Henrich where
This still existing tribes were
They're in this kind of situation. They can do
Numeracy and arithmetic when it's in very concrete terms if you talk about seeds or something
But that the abstract concept of a number is not is not available to them
Do you think the abstract concept of a number is useful to your life? Oh, yeah, like in what ways?
It's almost like asking how is the concept of the alphabet useful
It comes up so often that it's I mean just like how many lights do I set up for this interview, right?
It's not the concept of an abstract number though because it's like two people two lights one-to-one correspondence
like did you leverage the abstraction of two as a
Object, which is simultaneously a rational and a real and an integer. I see
You know is in the context of a group that has additive structure, but also multiply
There's light for you light for me, right? Yeah, I'm pretty sure the abstract idea of a number is important for all of us
but I don't think it's
Immediately obvious. It's more that it shapes the way we think. I'm not sure if it actually changes like the way we live
If you assume you don't work in STEM, right? We're like you literally are using it all the time
Yeah, I'm trying to go through my day and think through what where am I using them?
I mean, there's the obvious stuff like the commerce examples you mentioned where you go to a restaurant
You're figuring out what to pay or what to tip, but that seems a very particular example
Do I really use numbers that infrequently? I don't know. Yeah
Many people listening are probably screaming out of their head like much more apt examples, but
It's hard to say yeah, yeah
Well when a mathematician is working on a problem, what is the biggest mental constraint? Is it working memory? Is it processing speed?
Plants are limited by nitrogen usually like what is the equivalent of nitrogen for a mathematician?
That's a fun question. I mean, so I'm not a research mathematician
I shouldn't pretend like I am and so the right people to ask that question would be the research mathematicians. I
Wonder if you're gonna get consistent answers as with so many things. There's not one
Maybe
the number of available
Analogies to be able to draw connections like the more
Exposure you've had to disparate fields such that you could maybe see oh a problem-solving approach that was used here
might be useful here sometimes that's literally codified in the forms of
Connections between different fields as you know functors between categories or something like that, but sometimes it's a lot more
Intuitive the idea that a general flavor of an you know, someone's doing a
Combinatorics type question and they're like oh maybe generating functions are this useful like tool to bring to bear and then in some completely
Different context of studying like prime numbers. They're like, oh, maybe it could take a generating function type approach
Maybe you have to massage it to make it work
And the one of the reasons I say this is one of the tendencies that you've seen in math papers
In let's say to like the last 200 years
The typical number of authors is like much bigger now than before you people have this
I think misconception that math is a field with lone geniuses who are off like coming up with great insights like alone next to a
Blackboard and the reality is it's a highly collaborative field. I remember one of the first
Times that I was hearing from a mathematician's like a young kid
And I was in this math circles event and someone was asking this person like what surprised you about your job
But the first thing he said was how much travel was involved that he wasn't expecting that
And it's because you know if you're studying some very specific niche field that the way that you make progress in that is by
Collaborating with other people like in that field or maybe adjacent to that field and there's only so many about them
They probably aren't at your university. So you travel a lot to work with them these days a lot of that
I think happens on on zoom, but conferences are still super important and these sorts of
Events that bring people all under one roof like MSRI is maybe an example of a place that's trying to does that systematically
and
You could say that's a social thing, you know get get more ideas
But I think it's maybe hitting on this idea that what you want is exposure to as many available analogies
So the short answer to your question is like the nitrogen for mathematician is the analogy
This actually is an interesting question. I wasn't planning on asking you, but it just occurred to me
Is it surprising how new a lot of mathematics is even mathematics that has taught at the high school level
Whereas with physics or biology, that's also new
But you can tell a story where we didn't have the tools to look at the cell or to
Inspect an electron until very recently, but we've had mathematicians for two three thousand years who were doing
You know pretty sophisticated things even the ancient Greeks not depends on what you mean by sophisticated, but impressive things
I don't know why linear algebra is so new given that fact
I wouldn't have thought of math as being like new in that way if anything especially for talking at the high school level
I remember there's always a sensation that it's frustrating that all of the things are actually a way more than a hundred years old
In terms of you know that the names attached to the theorems that you're doing like none of them are remotely modern
whereas in biology, you know the
Understanding we have for like how proteins are formed is relatively much more modern and you might be just a couple generations away
I at some extent there's a raw manpower component to it
We're like how many people did pure math for most of history for most of history?
No one no one was a pure mathematician
They were like a mathematician plus something else or they were a physicist who you know
They were a natural philosopher and in so far as you're doing like natural philosophy one component of that is
Developing math, but it's not the full extent of what you do, you know, even the ones who we think of is like very very
Pure mathematicians in the sense that a lot of their most famous results are pure math like gauss actually a lot of the work
a lot of his you know output was also centered on very practical problems and
Yeah, and maybe like since then that's when you start to get an era of something more like pure mathematicians and
The raw number available that you have that man hours that are being put into developing new theorems is
Probably just got this huge spike as one the population grows and then also the percentage of the population that has the economic freedom to do
Something as indulgent as academia like grows
Maybe it's pretty reasonable that most of it is much much more recent
That would be my guess
But I mean some of these things seem actually pretty modern like information theory is less than a hundred years old
That's true, and it's you know pretty fundamental like theoretically you could have written that paper a long time ago
That's a really good example
And maybe like this is a sign that the math that's developed is more in the service of
The world that you live in and the adjacent problems that it's used to solve
Then we typically think of it on the one hand information theory such a good example because it's so pure that
You could have asked the question you could have defined the notion of a bit
But evidently there wasn't a strong enough need to think in that way
Whereas when you're doing error correction or you're thinking about actual information channels over
You know a wire and you're at Bell Labs that that's that's what prompts it another maybe really good example for that would be chaos theory
You could easily ask why why is chaos theory so recent?
You could have you know written the Lorenz equations since differential equations existed
Why didn't anyone do that and understand that there was this sort of sensitivity to initial conditions?
And in that case it would maybe be the opposite where it's not that you need the existence of computers as a problem
To solve or the problems that they introduce of the problems to solve
But instead you need them to even discover the phenomenon in the first place like a lot of original
Concepts in chaos theory came from basically running simulations or doing things that required a
Massive amount of computation that simply wouldn't be done by hand someone could ask the question
but they wouldn't have observed the unexpected phenomenon and
There even if it's
Questions that are as relevant to a pre-computer world as to a post-computer world like the nature of weather modeling or just the nature
Three-body problem like all of that kind of stuff
Somehow without the right tools for thought it just didn't come into the mind and so maybe yeah, maybe there's
other things like that where
those
Questions were pieces of technology that start to fundamentally shape everyone's life
Will then invariably also shift like the mathematicians focus
Mmm. This actually reminds me the first day of Scott Ironson's quantum information class
He said that what I'm about to describe to you could have been discovered by a mathematician
Before you know quantum physics existed if only they'd ask the question
We're gonna do probabilities
But we're only allowed to use unitaries and the rest of it is a you know
You could have just discovered of quantum mechanics or quantum information from there
I mean the thing about math right, especially if you're talking about pure axiomatized math
the experience as a student as an undergrad is that you are going through a textbook and it starts with saying
Here's the axioms of this field and then we're gonna deduce from those axioms like various different lemmas and theorems and proceed from that and
With that as the framing you get the impression that you could have just come up with any axioms
Make up some pile of axioms deduce what follows from them and the space of possible like math is
Unfathomably huge and so you need some process that calls down
What are the useful things to maybe pursue and so one of the things that I think is all too often missing in those pure math
Textbooks is the basically the motivating problem. Why is it that this was the set of axioms people found to be useful and not something else?
You know the framework for quantum information theory. It's like you married together linear linear algebra and probability
That's great
but there's all sorts of other things where you could kind of try to cram them together and maybe get some sort of math out and
The the question becomes is it worth your time to do that?
You know not theory is something that emerged because I think it was Lord Kelvin had a theory that all of the
like
elements on the periodic table had structures which were
Related to a knot like a knot being if you have a closed loop in 3d space
But maybe if you want to continuously deform it without it ever crossing itself
You ask the question like could you get back to say an open loop or if you can't get back to an open loop
What are the set of all other loops in 3d space that could be deformed into that?
And you end up categorizing what all the different knots are and this was started with a
completely incorrect theory for what's going on at the atomic level that gives
Adams this very stable structure because I think you you found with smoke rings like if you're
Somehow very dexterous with how you create these smoke rings
You can get them to form knots in 3d and they're they're very stable. It's like weirdly stable in the it'll never
You know cross over itself, and so it has all those properties now
That was irrelevant for understanding the periodic table
But it was an interesting mathematical question and people kind of ran with it
And in that case it was an arbitrary reason that someone thought to ask the question and then some people ran with it
And frankly, it's probably fewer people who run with it than would if it turned out to be a more useful question
So really you want to ask like what are the what are the things that prompt people to ask?
What turns out to be a mathematical question given that the space of what would be mathematical questions is so unfathomably huge that it's
It's just impossible to explore it through a random walk wait
Are you saying that lord kelvin's apple hitting you in story was that he was smoking a lot of pipe
Categorizes the puffs yeah, I can't remember if it was smoke rings out of his mouth, but I mean that's a natural place
We should look into that
Okay, so you you've changed how you and other creators have changed how pedagogy happens via animated videos
What would it take to do something similar for video games text all these other mediums? Why hasn't there been a similar sort of
broad-scale adoption and transformation of how teaching happens there
I'm not sure I understand the question you're saying
Where there's been a rise of explanatory videos. Yeah, why is there not a similar rise in like pedagogical video games? Yeah, and
well
One thing to understand I guess games are very hard to make
it takes a lot of resources for a given game and
Whenever people seem to try to do it with pedagogy as a motive like they're making some game whose goal is to teach something I
Don't play enough games
So I can't really speak to it the way that well-versed game designers can it seems to be the case that they are not
Fun in the way that people would want them to be fun and then the ones that are actually most effective are not
You know as directly educational
So there's clearly some of the one the one game that I actually have played
Because enough of my friends told me hey, you should really do this. It seems relevant to not explanation
In the last like decade was the witness. Yeah, have you played it? I've heard about it
So as someone who doesn't play games and then did play it. It's fantastic
It's absolutely well done in every possible way that you could want something to be well done
and critical on that is the
nature of how problems are solved the reason people were recommending it to me is because the feeling of playing the witness is a
Lot like the feeling of doing math
It's non-verbal
You come across these little puzzles where the simple mechanics of one puzzle inform you about the fundamental
Mechanics that become relevant to much much harder ones such that if you do it with the right sequence
you have the feeling of epiphany in ways that are like very self-satisfying and
You can you come away feeling like man
You should be able to do something like this for math and maybe you can and it's just that
It's so hard to make a game at all
That there's just not the rate of production that you would need to explore like get enough games out there that one of them
Hits because with YouTube, there's a lot of math videos on YouTube. It's okay that most of them suck
Right, it's okay because hey
You just need enough that when someone searches for the term that they want they get one that is good and scratches that itch
or that you know, they might get recommended something that is
Bringing a question to their mind that they wouldn't have thought about but they become really interested once it's there
Whereas with video games, I don't know. You're also spending a lot more time as a user on each one rather than a five-minute average
Experience, it's like a many many hour average experience. You ask the question on text
I don't know if I accept the premise that there's not the same
advances and
Innovation in the world of textual explanations like math a gun is a really really good example of this that's
Like the textbook of the future
It's a website. It's basically an interactive textbook
The explanations are really good and in so far as it doesn't have more of an impact or more of a reach
It's maybe just because people don't know about it or don't have an easy means of accessing
Something that recommends to them like the really good
innovations happening in the world of
Textual explanations in the way that YouTube has this recommending engine that tries its hardest to get more of these things in front of people
And I'm quite sure that in the world of actual like written textbooks
You I mean, there's so many that I like so much that I think it would be a disservice to talk about that
medium is not like making advances in terms of
More and more thought put towards empathy to the learner and things like that. Should the top point one percent of educators
Should they be exclusively on the internet because it seems like a waste if you were just a college professor or a high school professor
And you were teaching 50 kids a year or something
Given the greater scale available should should more of them be trying to see if they can reach more people
I think it's not a bad thing for more educators who are good at what they're doing to put their stuff online for sure
I highly encourage that even if it's as simple as getting someone to put a camera in the back of the classroom
I don't think it would be a good idea to get those people out of the classroom if anything
I think one of the best things that I could do for my career would be to put myself into more classrooms
And actually I'm quite determined at some point to like be a high school math teacher for some number of years
I don't know when there's such opportunity cost. I guess
Probably it's something I would plan on like notably later as long as there's not other like
Life logistics that occupy a lot of mind share because everything I know about high school teaching is like it just kicks your ass for the first
Right two years, but I would say I
One of the most valuable things that you can have if you're trying to explain stuff online is a sense of empathy for what the possible
Viewers are like that that are out there
The more distance that you put between yourself and them in terms of life circumstances
You know, I'm not a college student
So I don't have the same empathy with what a college students like certainly not a high school student
So I've lost that empathy that distance just makes it more and more of an uphill battle to make the content good for them and
I think
Keeping people in regular touch with just what people in the classroom actively need is
Necessary for them to remain as good and as sharp as they are
So yes get more of those top 0.1 percent to put their stuff online
But like I would absolutely disagree with the idea of taking them out of their existing circumstances
Maybe for a year or two so they don't lose that sharpness, but then like put them right back in
because
One it makes them better at the online explicit position, but also
The other thing I might disagree with is the idea that the reach is lower
Because
Okay, yes, it's a smaller number of people
But you're with them for much much more time and you actually have the chance of influencing their trajectory
through a social connection in a way that you you just don't over YouTube and
I think you're using the word education in a way that I would maybe sub out for the word explanation
like you want explanations to be online but like
Education the word education derives from the same route as the word educe like to bring out
And I really like that as a bit of etymology because it reminds you that
The job of an educator is not to like take their knowledge and shove it into the heads of someone else
The job is to bring it out
That's very very hard to do in a video and in fact
Even if you can kind of get at it by asking intriguing questions for the most part the video is there to
Answer something once someone has a question and
The teacher's job or the educator's job should be to provide the environment such that you're bringing out from your students as much as you can
through
Inspirated through projects through little bits of mentorship and encouragement along the way that
Requires, you know eye contact and being there in person and being at the true figure in their life rather than just an abstract voice behind a screen
Then should we think of educators more as motivational speakers?
As in the actual job of getting the content in your head
Is is maybe for the textbooks or for the youtube
But now the job like why we have college classes or high school classes
Is we have somebody who approximates tony robbins to you know get you to do the thing?
That would be a subset of it, but there's there's more than just motivational speech that goes into it, right?
there's
Facilitation of projects or even coming up with what the project projects are or recognizing
What a student is interested in so that you can try to tailor a question to their specific set of interests
Or you can maybe act as the curator where hey, there's a lot of online explanations for what a Poisson distribution is
You know okay, which of these is the right one that I could serve and based on knowing you as a particular student
What might resonate you might be in a better position to do that?
all of that
goes beyond
Being a tony robbins out, you know saying like oh you be the best person that you can be and all of that
and
One one thing I might say is that anytime that I'll chat with
Mathematicians and try to get a sense for how they got into it what got them started so so often
It starts by saying well, there was this one teacher
And that teacher did something very small
They like pulled them aside and just said hey, you're really good at this
Have you considered studying more or they give them an interesting problem and the thing that takes
Like at most 30 minutes of the teacher's time, maybe even 30 seconds has these
Completely monumental rippling effects for the life of the student they were talking to that then sets this them on this whole different trajectory
um two examples of this come to mind actually one is
This woman who was saying she had this moment
She got pulled aside from the teacher
And he just said like hey, I think you're really good at math
He should consider being a math major which had been completely outside of her
Like purview at that time and that like changed the way she thought about it
And then later she said she learned that he like did that for a large number of people
Hey, you're really good at that
Um, so that's a level of impact that you can have in person as a as a figure in their lives in a way that you can't over a screen
Then another one which was very funny. I was asking this guy why he went into the specific field that he did
It was a seemingly arbitrary thing in my mind
But I guess all all pure math seems to be and he said that he
for his first year of grad school was um
Sitting in this seminar and at the end of the seminar the professor who was this you know old professor
He had never met him before they didn't have any kind of connection. He six this guy out
He comes up and he says you
I have a problem for you a good research problem that I think I think might be um
A good place for you to start in the next couple months and this guy was like
Oh, okay, and he like gets this research problem and he spends some months thinking about it and he comes back
And then it later came to light that the professor
Mistook him for someone else
Someone he was supposed to be mentoring and so he was just like
Like the the stereotypical image of like a doddering old math professor
Who's not very in tune with the people in his life that was the actual situation actual situation
But nevertheless that moment of accidentally giving someone a problem completely shifted the research path for him
Which if nothing else shows you the sensitivity to initial conditions that takes place when you are a student
and how
the educator
Is is right on that nexus of sensitivity who can completely swing the fences one way or another for
um what you do and for every one of those stories there's going to be
An unfortunate counter balancing story about people who are demotivated from math. I mean I um, I think this was seventh grade
there was
this math class that I was in
And I was one of the people who was like good at math and enjoyed it and would often like help the people in the class
Understand it and all that and so I I had enough
ego built up I guess to have like a strong shell around things and
I guess for context there were I also really liked music and there was this like a concert that had happened
Where I had like a certain solo or something earlier in the day or earlier in that week
And there was a substitute teacher on one day
So she didn't have like any of the context and she gave some lesson
And then had that's been the second half of the class going over the um the homework for it
all of the other students in the class were very confused and
I think I remember like they would kind of come to me and I would try to offer to help them
And the substitute was going around the class in these circles and basically marking off a little star for how far down the homework
People were just to get a sense. Are they progressing and that was kind of her way of measuring. Are they very far?
And when she got to me I had done like none of them because I was spending my whole time trying to help all of the others
And she like after having written a little star next to the same problem like three different times
She said to me like, you know
Sometimes music people just aren't math people
And it keeps walking on
So now I was in the best possible circumstance to not let that hit hard because like one
I had the moral high ground of like, hey, I've just been helping all these people
Like I understand it and I've been doing your job for you. This was my like little egotistical seventh grade brain
I I knew that I knew the stuff and things like that
Even still even with all of that as like the armor that was put up
I remember it was just this like shock to my system
You know, she says this thing and it just made me like
Strangely teary-eyed or something
And I can only imagine if you're in a position where you're not confident in math
And the thing that you know deep in your heart is actually you are kind of struggling with it
Just a little throwaway comment like that could completely derail the whole system in terms of your relationship with the subject. So it's another
Example to illustrate the sensitivity to initial conditions, right where there, you know, I was I wasn't a robust position
It wasn't as sensitive I was I was gonna love math no matter what but you envision someone who's a little bit more on that teetering edge
And the comment one way or another either saying you're good at this
You should consider majoring in it or saying sometimes music people aren't math people which isn't even
True
Or you know what I mean like that was the other thing about it that
That like niggled at my brain when she said it
Yeah, I all all of that is just so important for people's development that
When people talk about online education as being you know valuable or revolutionary or anything like that
There's a part of me that sort of rolls my eyes because it it just doesn't get at the truth that
Online explanations have nothing to do with all of that important stuff
That's actually happening and at best it should be like in the service of helping that that side of things
That's where the rubber meets the road
I had Tyler Cohen on the podcast and he obviously has marginal revolution university these youtube videos where the explains economics
And he had a similar answer to give
I think I asked basically why aren't you just replacing or should we think of you as a substitute for all these economics teachers?
And in his mind as well
He was more a compliment to to the functions that happen in
In the class um and to your point about the initial conditions
I'm sure you remember the details of the story, but I just vaguely remember hearing this
Wasn't their case where a mathematician who went later ended up becoming famous. He arrives to a lecture late
See do you want to tell the story? I don't remember it uh beat for beat
But I think it was a statistics class and he was a grad student and he comes in
It's late and there's two problems on the board that the professor had written
He assumed that those two problems were homework
And so he goes home and he like works on them and after a couple weeks
He goes to the professor's office and like turns in his homework and he's like, I'm sorry. I'm so late
This one it just took me a lot longer than some of the others and the professor's like, oh, okay
And just like shuffles it away
And then a couple days later when the prophet had the time to like go through and see them
He realized that the student had fully answered these questions
What the student didn't know is that they were not homework problems written on the chalkboard
They were two unsolved problems in the field that the prophet put up as examples of what the field was striving for
I don't remember what problems they were so that that would be more fun color to add to the story
But then at least as the anecdote told to me however many years ago goes
The prophet then like finds the student's housing and like knocks on the door. He's like, do you realize that like
these were actually unsolved problems and
Then he gets to basically make those his thesis
so
that yeah that idea of
Just being given something for completely random reasons and it and it shifts the course of what you do
Right, right, right or just
You know, it's a thing where if you know a cross sort of solvable
You just like you just keep going at it until you solve it whereas or the four-minute mile, right exactly
Yeah, exactly. That's a great example. I another valuable experience at least one I had was
Taking erranton's classes in college and realizing I am like at least two standard deviations below him
And that was actually a really valuable experience for me. Um, not because it increased my confidence in
I didn't I didn't have a moment where
I was like, oh, wow, I'm good at this but it was useful to know
You know, but podcasting is
An easier thing to do, right? So then it's good to know that there are actual technical things out there where
Knowing that you can get really deep into something and people are just going to be like way above you having that sort of awareness
Do you think it's fair to have a mental model that has a static
G factor type quality here such that your two standard deviations below and that is forever the state of things
Or do you think that the right mental model is something that allows for flexibility on
Where contributions actually come from or where intuitions come from that, you know
Through many years of experience and certain kinds of problem solving
Maybe what seemed like a flash of insight was actually like the residue of just years of thinking about certain kinds of puzzles that
He had that you maybe didn't you can answer like a story from that class actually
so
He's giving some proof about like how one complete it actually wasn't that he was giving a proof of that
I forgot the name of the method, but it's a very important method in complexity theory
that helped to prove the the bounds of
The complexity of different problems
And he explains it and he says, you know
In 1999
I I approved this myself, but I realized that six months before somebody had already published a paper
With this method and I realized I'm catching up to the frontier now, you know, but
When I was a kid I was like doing euler. That's like 2000 years in regress now and six months behind
And then so later on in the day, I'm like, wait 1999
How old was Scott Aaronson in 1999?
And I think it was 18 or 19 and he was basically
Proving from frontier results in complexity theory that were yeah, so at that point you're like
All right, Aaronson's a special animal here. You are right. He's probably a special animal
But it just it's just broadly good to know
Just like have that sort of upper constraint on your dining Kruger that you can
This exists in the world
Maybe the thing that I would want to say is that
Whatever the scale is on which he's two standard deviations above you
That might not be the one scale that matters and that like contributions to these fields don't always look like
genius insights and that
Sometimes there's there's fruit to be born from say becoming kind of an expert in two different things and then finding connections between them and like
The the people who make contributions are not necessarily the the Scott Aaronsons of the world
Still you are probably
The truth that there are
It's like von Neumann's another example of one of these, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Okay, how much does uh girdle's inclinus theorem
Practically matter. Is it is it something that comes up a lot or is it just a interesting thing to know about the bounds that?
Isn't day-to-day applicable
You've asked me another question where I'm not the best one to ask and I should throw that um as a caveat to begin
From what I understand
It really doesn't come up. I mean the the analogy to make um
The paradoxical fact that it's conveying the idea that you can't have an axiom system that is both um
That will basically like prove all of the things that are true and which is also self-consistent
The the contradiction that you construct out of that has the same feeling as the sentence
This statement is a lie. Well, you know, you think about the statement if it's false, then it must be true
If it's true, it must be false
It's that same flavor and you might ask does the existence of that paradox mean that it's hard to speak english
Yeah, that's interesting
It's so rare that you would come up with something that happens to have a bit of self-reference in it
there were
One of the first times that there was something that came up
That didn't feel quite as pathological in that way if the curious listener wants to go into it that search term would be
Paris Harrington theorems where
It's it's a little pathological
But it wasn't the really a question that came up that didn't seem like it was deliberately constructed to be one of these
self-referential things where you know
It it shows itself to be outside the bounds of whatever axiom system
You were starting with and it uh, so it was you know shown to be unresolvable in a certain sense
But it it was asking a I don't want to say natural because a lot of these math
Questions aren't natural in the sense that most people would want but it was asking a question where you wouldn't expect that to be true
So maybe at the edges of theory there are sometimes when the
Paradoxes that are possible if they curdles and possibility theorem shows like do eke their ways in
The impression I get is no no mathematician is thinking about it. They're not actively worrying about it
It's not like oh god
No, like can I be sure that the stuff that i'm going to show us to for all the practical problems of it's like, you know
The remand hypothesis or twin primes almost everyone's like no, there's going to be an answer
like it
Maybe they turn out to be unresolvable in in one of these uh ways, but like there's just a strong sense that
That theorem came from a pathology
in a way that
Natural questions that people actually care about don't
That's really interesting that something from the outside
In and in popularizations is seems to be a very fundamental thing where people people have definitely heard about this, right?
Is not internally a good a good analogy here is in computer science the halting problem
it's like you take a computer science course one of the first things you'll learn is
you know the proof of the halting problem and
It's another one of those things where you don't really need to be able to prove that every single
Or you have that sort of program available. Yeah
No comment no more comment
Why are good explanations so hard to find?
Despite how useful they are
Obviously, there's many other other than you as well
There's many other cases of good explanations, but generally it just seems like there aren't as many as there should be
Is it just a story of economics where it's nobody's?
Incentive to be making really spend a lot of time making good explanations
Is it just a really hard skill that isn't correlated with being able to come up with a discovery itself?
What why are good explanations scarce? I think there's maybe two
explanations
The first less important one is going to be that there's a difference between
Knowing something and then remembering what it's like not to know it
And the character's difficult explanation is that you're walking someone on a path
From the feeling of not understanding up to the feeling of understanding
Earlier you were asking about societies that are that lack numeracy
That's such a hard brain state to put yourself in like what's it like to not even know numbers?
How would you start to explain what numbers are?
Maybe you should go from a bunch of concrete examples, but like
The way that you think about numbers and adding things it's just you have to really unpack a lot before you even start there
And I think at higher levels of abstraction that becomes even harder
Because it it shapes the way that you think so much that remembering what it's like not to understand it
You're teaching some kid algebra and the premise of like a variable. They're like, what is x?
You're like, well, it's it's it's not necessarily anything, but it's what we're solving for like yeah, but what is it?
Like trying to answer what is x is a weirdly hard thing because it
Is the premise that you're even starting from?
The more important one probably is that the best explanation
Depends heavily on the individual who's learning and the perfect explanation for you
Often might be very different from the perfect explanation for someone else
So there's a lot of very good domain specific explanations, you know
Pull up in any textbook and like chapter 12 of it is probably explaining the content in there like quite well
Assuming that you've read chapters one through 11, but if you're coming in from a cold start, it's a little bit hard
And so the real gold nugget is like, how do you construct explanations which are as generally?
Useful as possible as generally appealing as possible
And that I think because you can't assume shared context it becomes this challenge
and I think there's like tips and tricks along the way but
Because the people that are often making explanations have a specific enough audience
It is this classroom of 30 people or it's this discipline of majors who are in their third year
All the explanations from the people who are professional explainers in some sense are so targeted that
Maybe it's the economic thing you're talking about. There's not
Or at least until recently in history. There hasn't been the need to or the incentive to come up with something that would be
Um motivating and approachable and clear to an extremely wide variety of different backgrounds
Is the process of making your videos is that mostly you?
Okay
Given the scale you're reaching it seems that if it was possible
It would you know, just like a small increase in productivity would be worth like an entire production studio
And it's interesting to me or surprising that the transaction cost of having
A production setup are high enough that it's better to literally do the mundane details yourself
Yeah, I mean
This could honestly just be a personal flaw like i'm not good at um
Pulling people in and then I've struggled to do this effectively in the past
But a part of it is that the the seemingly mundane details are sometimes just how I even think about constructing it in the first place
You know the first thing that a lot of youtubers will do if they can hire is hire an editor
and this will be because
They film a lot of things and so a lot of the editing process is removing the stuff that was
Filmed that shouldn't be in the video and just leaving the stuff that should be in the video
And that's time consuming and it's kind of mundane and it's probably not that relevant to
What the creator should be thinking about when you're not filming stuff
Like the the editing process for me
You know I start by laying out all of the animations and stuff that I'll want in a timeline
And then once I record the voice over the actual editing is like a day
And it's not like I guess I could hire someone and gain a day back of my life
But the the communication back and forth for saying what specifically I want like all of the little cuts that I'm making along the way
Are my way of even thinking about what I want the final piece to be such that it would be hard to put it into words
It's it's similar for why I maybe find it quite hard to use like a co-pilot and some of these like
LLM tools and coding where for the animation code
You know it can be super great if you're learning some new library and it knows about that library that you don't
But for my library that I know inside it out if I'm just using it it feels like oh, this should be the most
Automatable thing ever, you know, it's it's just text
Like I should be the first youtuber who can actually do this better because the the substance behind each animation is text
It's not like an editing workflow in quite the same way
But it doesn't work and I think it's because
um
Maybe it's just because you need a multimodal thing that actually understands the look of the output like the output isn't
Something that is consumable in text. It's something about how it looks, but at a deeper level
I can't even put into words what I want to put on the screen
Except to do so in code like that's just the way that I'm thinking about it and
Like if I were to try to put into English the thing that I want as a comment that then gets expanded
That task is actually harder than writing it in in the code
And if it's clunky to write in code that's a sign that I should like change the interface of the library such that
It's less clunky to be expressive in the way that I want
And it's in that same way where a lot of the creative process
Is
That feels mundane
Those are just like the cogs of thought slowly turning in a way that if they weren't turning for that part
They would have to be turning during the interface of communication with a collaborator. Yeah on the point of working with
co-pilot uh where
We kind of visualized the changes you wanted to make there were the paper for microsoft research the sparks of hji paper
had it actually really interesting example where it was generating letek and they
You generated some output and they say change this so that the visual that comes up in the rendering is different in this way
And it was actually able to do that which was their evidence that it can understand the higher level visual abstraction
Um, so but I guess I can't do that for manum
There's a couple reasons I might um, it might not be as fair a comparison one would be the two versions of manum
There was a split where there's a community version that is you know by the community for the community
And then mine the interfaces are largely similar
The rendering engines are quite different
But because of slight differences in that
And you know it might have a tendency it learned from one or it saw examples from one and it's intermixing them
So stuff just doesn't quite run when there's discrepancy
I maybe shot myself in the foot where all of my code for videos like I don't really comment it that much because it's it's like a
One and done deal it's if it's you know, there's also a
for the core library I could comment and document a lot better, but like
The way that I'm making it feels much more like the editing flow if you were to look at the
Operation history of someone in after effects right like written down. It's a little bit more like that where
There's not a perfect description in English of the thing that I want to do and then the execution of that
It's just it's just the execution of that
um
And you know, it's it's not meant to be editable and hindsight as much because I'm just in the flow of making the scene for the one video
and
You know, maybe
I could have given it a better chance to learn what it's supposed to be happening by having a really
Well-documented set of like this is the input. This is the output. This is the comment describing it in English
But even then that wouldn't hit the problem on like I would have to articulate what the thing I want is in the first place
And the the language the program language is just the right mode of articulation in the first place
This is something I wanted to I was really curious about ever since I learned about it
I watched many of the summer of math exploration prize videos
And it was shocking to me how good that I mean these looked like entire production studios were dedicated to making them
Many of them and it was shocking to me that you could motivate and elicit
This quality of contribution
Given the relatively modest prize pool, which I was like five winners $1,000 each
um
What is your explanation of just running prizes like this? Why you were able to get such high quality contributions?
Is it is it is a prize pool even relevant? Is it just about your reputation and reach?
I do wonder how relevant the prize pool is
I mean we've been thinking about this because you know, we did it first in 2021
then we plan to continue doing it annually and
I probably if I like
Was a mover and a shaker could raise much more if I wanted to like get a big prize pool there
I don't think it would change the quality of the content because the impression I get is that people aren't fundamentally motivated by
Like winning some cash prize
certainly
They're not
Investing with a like expected value calculation on what if they are that's a terrible terrible plan
And if anything like that might be a problem like let's say it was $100,000 prize for each of the winners
Then it would be a real problem where someone who and you know people do like to illusionally think that they're very likely going to be the winner
They might like actually pour a lot of their own resources into it with the expectation of gaining it and then
That's just a messy situation. I don't want to be in with like why wasn't mine chosen as a winner because
The whole event is not supposed to be about
winners in fact
Maybe for listeners who don't know I should describe what you're talking about
The summer of math exposition
Actually, the the history is a little bit funny because it started with an intern application
Where I in 2021 wanted to have
Just like a couple interns to do a certain thing on my website basically and
I put out a call for people to apply
I got 2500 applicants and somewhere in the application
I mentioned that during the summer in addition to like the main task I wanted them to do
You know, I'd give freedom if they just wanted to do something relevant to math exposition online
That was their own thing
I'd be happy to provide
You know some mentorship or just give them the freedom to do that one day a week and give me a little pitch on what your
What your idea would be and as I went through, you know, all of the applications
Which is a lot. Um, I
Felt so bad because so often the person would have a little pitch and like what they would want to make
And in my mind, I'd think cool
You should make that you don't need me to like do that like just spend your summer making that why not?
And people were clearly inspired by the thought of adding something and like I said earlier
Being a youtuber is the most common
Like job aspiration among the youth these days
and so
Is a consolation of sorts to those
99% that I had to reject for the internship. I said, oh, but what we will do
We're just gonna like host this thing. We'll call it the summer of math exposition where we'll give you a deadline
I'll like promise to feature some people in a video
maybe I'll choose five of them to do that and
If you feel like the thing that you were going to do like with me as your 20 project as an intern is something
You're excited about make it a hundred percent project or 20 percent or whatever whatever freedom you have
just do it anyway and like I can give you this little carrot in the form of featuring it in a video and
Give you a deadline which let's be honest is what actually makes the difference between people doing something and procrastinating on it sometimes
Later there was I think it was brilliant that year said they would be happy to put some cash prizes in so I said sure. Why not?
I don't think the cash prize
Is super important, but it's nice. I mean it shows that someone actually cared and put some real thought into
Doing something that wasn't just a made-up gold star
But they put some material behind saying that you were selected as a winner of this thing
But all in all it was never supposed to be about choosing winners
It was just get more people to make stuff and if anything I'd actually
I love it when I see stuff from existing educators and teachers where it's maybe not the youth who want to be youtubers
Pouring their hearts and souls into it, but it's the educator who built up a lot of intuition over the course of their career
For what constitutes a clear explanation and they're just sharing it more broadly
so
to your question on
What is it that caused there to be such high production quality in some of the entries there
Part of the answer might just be that like tooling is so good now that individuals can actually make pretty incredible things sometimes
I misphrase if I said production quality. I might just meant the whole composition as a whole
Yeah, well, there's a there's a selection filter too, right?
Like there were in that first year 1,200 submissions
I featured in you know the winning video five of them. So
Of course, they're going they're necessarily
Unrepresentative of the norm
By the very nature of who I was choosing to feature
But the fact that those were even in the pool something that high quality was even in the pool
I think it hits a little bit to your miracle year point where I think
What might be happening is you have people with a ton of potential energy for something that they've kind of been thinking about making for a
long time
And the hope was to give people a little push. Here's a deadline. Here's a little prize
Here's a promise that maybe if you make it it won't just go into the void
But there's a chance that it could it gets exposed to more people
Which I think is absolutely played out and not for the reason that someone might expect where I choose winners
And I feature those winners and people watch them
a huge amount of viewership happens
Before I even begin the process of looking at them
And this was an accident too where in this first year we got 1,200 submissions
I said expect judges who are reviewing it to spend at most 10 minutes on each piece
So it could be longer, but like don't rely on someone watching it for more
But realistically when I'm reviewing something I want to watch the whole piece. Um
I absolutely do not have time to watch
It takes I've learned it takes me about two weeks of just full-time work to like watch a hundred of these
pieces and give the kind of feedback that I want
and to
To manage that problem of more than we could manually review
We put together this peer review system that would basically have an algorithm feed people pairs of videos
And they would just say which one is better and then it would feed them another one
And in the first two years we we just used a tool that was common for hackathons that did this
And what that did is one it gave us a partially ordered list of
Content by quality loosely. We didn't need it to be perfect
We just needed there to be a very high chance that the five most deserving videos were visible somewhere in that top 100, right?
So there the algorithm doesn't have to be perfect
but what happened I think is that
By having this period when a ton of people are watching the same batch of videos
So a thing I've learned about the youtube algorithm is in theory
You would want to just use machine learning for everything, right?
Like you have some massive neural network where on the input of it
It's got five billion videos or however many exist and the output it decides what seven are best to recommend to you
That is completely computationally infeasible, right? I also
Think I think this is all public knowledge
But so what you have to do instead is use some sort of proxies
As a first pass to nominate a video to even be fed into the machine learning driven algorithm
So that you're only feeding in like a thousand or so or something in the order of thousands like nominees
so the real
Difference that it can make if you've made a really good video between it getting to the people who would like it
And not getting there. It's not the flaws in the algorithm. The algorithm is probably quite good
It's the mismatch between the proxies being used to nominate stuff to see whether it's even in the running
So one of the things used for nomination is
Understanding the co-watch graph where if you've watched video a and you've also watched video b and then I watch video a
Your watching both of those gives a little link between them
Or maybe you and a ton of other people watching both of them gives a little link between
such that once I watch video a
b is potentially nominated in that phase because
You know, it's recognized that there's a lot of co-watching
That's something that I'm sure still is like quite challenging at scale
But it's more plausible to do at scale than like running some massive neural network
And so I think what might have happened is that by having a bunch of co-watching happening on this same pool of videos
All you need is for like some of them to have decent reach and get recommended, right?
Because then that kicks off
It's like igniting a pile of kindling where then if others are good if they're going to give people good experiences
They get not only nominated but then recommended which then like kicks back in the feedback loop there
so
That turns out to be
I think as close to a guarantee as you can get of saying if you make something that's good
It's a good piece that will satisfy someone
They come away feeling like they learned something that they otherwise didn't know and it was well presented
If you can get it into this peer review process, it will reach people. It's not just going to be shouting into the void
And and in this case, you know, there was last year
I think over 100 videos where after the first two weeks they had more than 10,000 views
Which I know in the grand scheme people think like huge numbers of views and millions out there, but like for a
for a fresh channel
Talking about a niche mathematical topic to be able to put it out and like get 10,000 people to watch it
I think is amazing, right and the idea that that could happen for over 100 people. I think is amazing
so
That had nothing to do with the prize pool, right in in that
the
The motive might have been a hope of like actually getting some reach and having some sense of a guarantee of there being some reach
Ironically the reason to do the whole peer review system in the first place is in the service of selecting winners
And so like without something in the service of selecting winners
If you just said hey, we're having a watch fest where everyone watches each other's things somehow it wouldn't quite have the same like
I don't know poll that gets people into it
So I think it still makes sense to have winners and to have some material behind those winners
It doesn't have to be much though. And if anything, I think it might ruin it to make it too much
I'll also say it's $15,000 actually because we will give $500 to 20 different honorable mentions
at least this year
so
Still pretty modest in the scheme
There's like how much money you can invest to try to get more math lessons in the world
I watch many of the honorable mentions as well because they were just topics that are interesting to me and
I mean
It's like the thing that the president of chicago university said at one point where he said we could discard the people
We admitted and select the next thousand for our class and there would be no difference. It was that level of
You know your yeah, that level of peak. Yeah, and I really admire by the way
Not only the education that you're provided directly with your videos
Which have reached millions of people
But the fact that you're also setting up this way of getting more people to contribute
And maybe get to topics that you wouldn't have time to get to yourself
So I like I really admire that you're doing that
If you're self teaching yourself a field
That involves mathematics. Let's say it's physics or some other thing like that
There's problems where you have to understand. How do I put this in terms of a dirt of an integral?
and from there it's can I solve this integral and
What would you recommend to somebody who is teaching themselves?
Let's say quantum mechanics and they I figured out how to put how to get the right
Mathematical equation here. Is it important for their understanding to be able to take go from there to
Getting it to the end result or can they just say well, I can just abstract that out. I understand the broader
Way to set up the problem in terms of the physics itself
I think where a lot of self learners shoot themselves in the foot is by skipping calculations by by thinking that that's
incidental to the core understanding
But actually you I think you do build a lot of intuition just by putting in the reps of certain calculations
Some of them maybe turn out not to be all that important and in that case. Okay, so be it but sometimes
that's what maybe shapes your sense of
Where the substance of a result really came from
I don't know it might be something you realize
Oh, it's because of the square root that you get this decay and if you didn't like really go through the exercise
You would just instead coming away thinking like such and such decays
But with other circumstances it doesn't decay and like not really understanding what was
The core part of this, you know high level result. That is the thing you actually want to come out remembering
Like putting in the work with the calculations is where you solidify all of those
underlying intuitions
And without the forcing function of homework
People we just like don't do it
So that I think that's one thing that I learned is a big difference post college versus during college
Is like post college. It's very easy in learning stuff to just accidentally skip that and then
It doesn't sink in as well
So I think when you're reading something having a notebook next to you just like having pen and paper pencil and paper whatever it is
Should be considered part of the actual reading process
And if you are relying too much on like reading and kind of looking up and thinking in your head
You know, maybe that's going to get something but it's it's not going to be as highly leveraged as it could be
What will be the what would be the impact of more self teaching in terms of what kinds of personalities benefit most?
so
There's obviously a difference in the kind of person who benefits most
In a situation where there's it's a college course and everybody has to do the homework, but maybe some people are better
tuned for the kind of work that's placed there versus
All this stuff is available for you on youtube and then textbooks for exercises and so on
But you have to have the conscientiousness to actually go ahead and pursue it
I mean, how do you see the
Distribution of who will benefit from the more modern way in which you can get whatever you want
But you have to push yourself to get it
There's a really good book that's actually kind of relevant to some of your early questions called failure to disrupt
That goes over the history of educational technology
Trying to answer the question you have these repeated cycles of people saying such and such technology that
Almost always is getting more explanations to more people
Promises that it'll disrupt the existing university system or disrupt the existing school system and just kind of never does
You know, one of the things that it highlights is how stratifying
These technologies will be in that they actually are very very good
for those who are already motivated or kind of already on the top in some way and
They end up
Struggling the most
Just for those who are performing more poorly
And maybe it's because of confounding causation where the same thing that causes someone to not do poorly in the traditional system
Also means that they're not going to engage as well with the the plethora of tools available
I don't know if this answers your question, but I would reemphasize that what's probably most important
To getting people to actually learn something is not the explanation or the quality of explanations available
Because since the printing press that has been
Not not literally true because maybe access to libraries and such as as universal as you would want
But like people had access to the explanation once they were motivated
but instead
It's going to be the social factors like are the are the
Five best friends that you have also interested in the stuff and do they tend to push you up or they tend to pull you down
When it comes to learning more things or do you ever a reason to there's a job that you want to get or domain that you want
To enter where you just have to understand something is there a personal project that you're doing like
the existence of compelling personal projects and
Encouraging friend groups probably does way way more than the average quality of explanation online ever could
Because once you get someone motivated one, they're just they're going to learn it
It maybe makes it a more fluid process if there's good explanations versus bad ones
And it keeps you from having some people drop out of that process
Which is important
But if you're not motivating them into it in the first place
It doesn't matter if you have the you know most world-class explanations on every possible topic out there
It's uh, it's it's screaming into a void effectively
And I don't I don't know the best way to get more people to um no things I I have had a thought
This this is the kind of thing that could never be done in practice
But instead it's something you would like write some kind of novel about
Where if you want the perfect school
Right something where you can insert some students and then you want them to get the best education that you can
what you need to do
Is let's say it's a high school you insert a lot of like
Really attractive high schooler plants as actors that you like get the students to develop crushes
On the various plants right and then anything that you want to learn the plant has to express a certain interest in it
They're like oh, they're really interested in Charles Dickens or something right and they express this interest and then they
You know suggest that they would become more interested in whoever your target student is if they
Also read the dickens with them. They're also were like interested in learning the physics
Like if you get that in a way, you know, you socially engineer this setting
The effectiveness that that would have to get students to actually learn stuff is probably so many miles above anything else that we
Could do that nothing like that in practice could ever actually literally work
But at least viewing that as this end point of okay
This mode of interaction would be hyper effective at education
Is there anything that kind of gets at that right and so okay the kind of things that get at that it would be
Being cognizant of your child's peer group or something which is think something that parents. I think very naturally do or
Okay, it doesn't have to be a romantic crush, but it could be that there's
There's respect for the teacher, right?
It's someone that they genuinely respect and look up to such that when they say
There's an an edification to come from read reading dickens that that actually lands in a way
and so
Taking that as a paragon and then letting everything else approximate that
Has I would emphasize nothing to do with the quality of online explanations that there are out there
That at best just makes it such that you know, you can you can lubricate the process once someone's sufficiently interested
You found a new replica use case
yes, I mean
I'm not saying we should do it, but
Think of how effective that would be
Uh, okay final question. This is something I should have followed up on earlier
But your plans to become a high school teacher for some amount of years
When you're planning on doing that and what do you hope to get out of that? I would say no concrete plans
I would say it would I wouldn't want to do it in a period where like I also have young children
And therefore it would make sense to like
Maybe a lot of people will say this kind of thing
But there's friends of mine who think when their child is in like, um, you know high school
That's that's when they would want to be a high school teacher
I think two two things I would want to get out of it one of them
As I was emphasizing I think you just lose touch with what it's like not to know stuff or what it's like to be a student
And so maintaining that kind of connection so that I don't become dollar and dollar over time feels important the other
I would like to
Live in a world where more people who are savvy with STEM spend some of their time teaching
Um, I just think that's one of the highest leverage ways that you can think of to actually get more people to engage with math
And so I would like to
Encourage people to do that and call that call to action
Um
Some some notion of spending maybe not your whole career, but a little bit of time
In teaching there's not as fluid a system for doing that as say
You know going through a tour of service in certain certain countries where everyone like spends two years in the military
So shy of having a system like that for education
There's all these kind of ad hoc things where you know
Charter schools might have like an emergency credential system to like get a science teacher in
Um, but there's a you know teach for america is something out there
there's enough ways that someone could spend a little bit of time that's probably not fully saturated at this point that
You know the world would be better if more people did that and
It would be hypocritical for me to suggest that and then not to actually put my uh, but my
Feet where my words are
Yeah, well, uh, I think that's a great note to leave it on grant. Um, thanks so much for coming on the podcast
And genuinely, I mean you you're one of the people I really really admire but what you've done for the
The landscape of math education is it mean it's really remarkable. So
This is a pleasure to talk to you. Thanks for saying that I had a lot of fun
Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that episode
As always the most helpful thing you can do is to share the podcast
Send it to people you think might enjoy it put it in twitter your group chats, etc. Just splits the world
Appreciate your listening. I'll see you next time. Cheers
You